PandOSsh: Phase 2
Luca Bassi (luca.bassi14@studio.unibo.it)
Luca Orlandello (luca.orlandello@studio.unibo.it)
December 10, 2025
1 Phase 2 - Level 3: The Nucleus
Level 3, the Nucleus, builds on the previous levels in two key ways:
1. Receives control from the exception handling facility of Level 1. There are two categories of
exceptions:
• TLB-Refill events, a relatively frequent occurrence which is triggered during address trans-
lation when no matching entries are found in the TLB. Since address translation will not
be introduced until the Support Level, the handling of TLB-Refill events is delayed until
then.
• All other exception types, including device/timer interrupts, which, by definition, occur
infrequently. This category can be further broken down into
– Interrupts: peripheral devices and internal timers
– System Service calls (SYSCALL)
– TLB exceptions - exceptions related to the memory management unit (MMU)
– Program Trap exceptions (e.g. Bus Error)
2. Using the data structures from Level 2, and the facility to handle both system service calls
and device interrupts, timer interrupts in particular, provide a process scheduler – support
multiprogramming and multiprocessor.
Hence, the purpose of the Nucleus is to provide an environment in which asynchronous sequential
processes (i.e. heavyweight threads) exist, each making forward progress as they take turns sharing
the processor. Furthermore, the Nucleus provides these processes with exception handling routines,
low-level synchronization primitives, and a facility for “passing up” the handling of Program Trap,
TLB exceptions and certain SYSCALL requests to the Support Level.
Important: Since virtual memory is not supported until the Support Level (Phase 3), all addresses
at this level are assumed to be physical addresses.
In summary, after some one-time Nucleus initialization code, the Nucleus will repeatedly dispatch
a process, i.e. remove a PCB from the Ready Queue and perform a LDST (load state) on the processor
state stored in the PCB (p_s). This Current Process will run until:
• It makes a system call (SYSCALL). The Nucleus will handle the system call or pass along the
handling to the Support Level. Some system calls block the Current Process - the PCB is
placed on the ASL and the Scheduler is called to dispatch the next job. If the system call is
non-blocking, control is returned to the Current Process.
• It terminates; which is signaled via a system call. The Nucleus will call the Scheduler to dispatch
the next process on the Ready Queue.
1
• The timer assigned to the Scheduler generates an interrupt; the Current Process’s quantum/time
slice has expired. Its PCB is enqueued back on the Ready Queue and the Scheduler is called to
dispatch the next job.
• A device interrupt occurs (exclusive of the timer assigned to the Scheduler). The interrupt is
acknowledged, and the device’s status code is passed along to the PCB (i.e. process) that got
unblocked as a result of the interrupt; the PCB that was waiting for the I/O to complete. The
newly unblocked PCB is enqueued back on the Ready Queue and control is returned to the
Current Process.
Hence the Nucleus’s functionality can be broken down into five main categories:
• Nucleus initialization [Section 2].
• The Scheduler [Section 3].
• Exception handling and SYSCALL processing [Section 6].
• Device interrupt handler [Section 7].
• The passing up of the handling of all other events. This includes TLB-Refill events [Section 4],
SYSCALLs not handled at this level, page faults, Program Trap exceptions, etc. [Section 8].
2 Nucleus Initialization
Every program needs an entry point (i.e. main()). The entry point for PandOSsh performs the
Nucleus initialization, which includes:
1. Declare the Level 3 global variables. This should include:
• Process Count: integer indicating the number of started, but not yet terminated processes.
• Soft-block Count: A process can be either in the “ready”, “running”, or “blocked” (also
known as “waiting”) state. This integer is the number of started, but not terminated
processes that in are the “blocked” state due to an I/O or timer request.
• Ready Queue: A queue of PCBs that are in the “ready” state.
• Current Process: Pointer to the PCB that is in the “running” state, i.e. the current
executing process.
• Device Semaphores: The Nucleus maintains one integer semaphore for each external (sub)device,
plus one additional semaphore to support the Pseudo-clock. Since terminal devices are actu-
ally two independent sub-devices, the Nucleus maintains two semaphores for each terminal
device.
2. Populate the Processor 0 Pass Up Vector. The Pass Up Vector is part of the BIOS Data Page,
and for Processor 0, is located at 0x0FFF.F900 [Section 11]. The Pass Up Vector is where the
BIOS finds the address of the Nucleus functions to pass control to for both TLB-Refill events
and all other exceptions. Specifically,
• Set the Nucleus TLB-Refill event handler address to
passupvector->tlb_refll_handler = (memaddr)uTLB_RefillHandler;
where memaddr, in types.h, has been aliased to unsigned int. Since address translation is
not implemented until the Support Level, uTLB_RefillHandler is a place holder function
whose code is provided [Section 4]. This code will then be replaced when the Support Level
is implemented.
2
• Set the Stack Pointer for the Nucleus TLB-Refill event handler to the top of the Nucleus
stack page: 0x2000.1000 (constant KERNELSTACK). Stacks in μRISC-V grow down.
• Set the Nucleus exception handler address to the address of your Level 3 Nucleus func-
tion (e.g. exceptionHandler) that is to be the entry point for exception (and interrupt)
handling [Section 5]:
passupvector->exception_handler = (memaddr)exceptionHandler;
• Set the Stack pointer for the Nucleus exception handler to the top of the Nucleus stack
page: 0x2000.1000 (constant KERNELSTACK).
3. Initialize the Level 2 (Phase 1) data structures:
initPcbs();
initASL();
4. Initialize all the previously declared variables: Process Count (0), Soft-block Count (0), Ready
Queue (mkEmptyProcQ()), and Current Process (NULL). Since the device semaphores will be
used for synchronization, as opposed to mutual exclusion, they should all be initialized to zero.
5. Load the system-wide Interval Timer with 100 milliseconds (constant PSECOND) [Section 7.3].
6. Instantiate a single process, place its PCB in the Ready Queue, and increment Process Count.
A process is instantiated by allocating a PCB (i.e. allocPcb()), and initializing the processor
state that is part of the PCB. In particular this process needs to have interrupts enabled, kernel-
mode on, the SP set to RAMTOP (i.e. use the last RAM frame for its stack), and its PC set to the
address of test. To enable interrupt set the mie field of the processor state inside the PCB to
the constant MIE_ALL. To enable interrupt and kernel mode set the status field of the processor
state inside the PCB to the constant MSTATUS_MPIE_MASK | MSTATUS_MPP_M see Dott. Rovelli’s
thesis for more details. Furthermore, set the remaining PCB fields as follows:
• Set all the Process Tree fields to NULL.
• Set the accumulated time field (p_time) to zero.
• Set the blocking semaphore address (p_semAdd) to NULL.
• Set the Support Structure pointer (p_supportStruct) to NULL.
Test is a supplied function/process that will help you debug your Nucleus. One can assign a
variable (i.e. the PC) the address of a function by using
pcb->p_s.pc_epc = (memaddr) test;
Remember to declare test as “external” in your program by including the line:
extern void test();
7. Call the Scheduler.
Once main() calls the Scheduler its task is complete since control should never return to main().
At this point the only mechanism for re-entering the Nucleus is through an exception; which includes
device interrupts. As long as there are processes to run, the processor is executing instructions on their
behalf and only temporarily enters the Nucleus long enough to handle a device interrupt or exception
when they occur. At boot/reset time the Nucleus is loaded into RAM beginning with the second
frame of RAM: 0x2000.1000. The first frame of RAM is reserved for the Nucleus stack for Processor 0.
Furthermore, Processor 0 will be in kernel-mode with all interrupts masked, and the processor Local
Timer disabled. The PC is assigned 0x2000.1000 and the SP, which was initially set to 0x2000.1000
at boot-time (stack grows down), will now be some value less, due to the activation record for main()
that now sits on the stack.
3
3 The Scheduler
Your Nucleus should guarantee finite progress; consequently, every ready process will have an opportu-
nity to execute. The Nucleus should implement a simple preemptive round-robin scheduling algorithm
with a time slice value of 5 milliseconds (constant TIMESLICE). Preemptive CPU scheduling requires
the use of an interrupt generating system clock. μRISC-V offers two choices: the single system-wide
Interval Timer or a Processor’s Local Timer (PLT). One should use the PLT to support per processor
scheduling since the Interval Timer is reserved for implementing Pseudo-clock ticks [Section 7.3]. In
its simplest form whenever the Scheduler is called it should dispatch the “next” process in the Ready
Queue.
1. Remove the PCB from the head of the Ready Queue and store the pointer to the PCB in the
Current Process field.
2. Load 5 milliseconds on the PLT [Section 7.2].
3. Perform a Load Processor State (LDST) [Section 13.2] on the processor state stored in PCB of
the Current Process (p_s) of the current CPU.
Dispatching a process transitions it from a “ready” process to a “running” process.
The Scheduler should behave in the following manner if the Ready Queue is empty:
1. If the Process Count is 0, invoke the HALT BIOS service/instruction [Section 13.2]. Consider this
a job well done!
2. If the Process Count > 0 and Soft-block Count > 0 enter a Wait State. A Wait State is where the
processor is not executing instructions, but “twiddling its thumbs” waiting for a device interrupt
to occur. μRISC-V supports a WAIT instruction expressly for this purpose [Section 13.2].
Important: Before executing the WAIT instruction, the Scheduler must first set the mie register
to enable interrupts and either disable the PLT (also through the mie register) using:
setMIE(MIE_ALL & ~MIE_MTIE_MASK);
unsigned int status = getSTATUS();
status |= MSTATUS_MIE_MASK;
setSTATUS(status);
see Dott. Rovelli’s thesis for more details.
The first interrupt that occurs after entering a Wait State should not be for the PLT.
3. Deadlock for PandOSsh is defined as when the Process Count > 0 and the Soft-block Count is
zero. Take an appropriate deadlock detected action; invoke the PANIC BIOS service/instruction
[Section 13.2].
4 TLB-Refill events
As outlined above [Section 2], each Processor Pass Up Vector’s Nucleus TLB-Refill event handler
address should be set to the address of your TLB-Refill event handler (e.g. uTLB_RefillHandler).
The code for this function, for Level 3/Phase 2 testing purposes should be as follows:
void uTLB_RefillHandler() {
int prid = getPRID();
setENTRYHI(0x80000000);
setENTRYLO(0x00000000);
TLBWR();
LDST((state_t*) BIOSDATAPAGE);
}
4
Writers of the Support Level (Level 4/Phase 3) will replace/overwrite the contents of this function
with their own code/implementation.
5 Exception Handling
As described above [Section 2], at startup, the Nucleus will have populated the Processor 0 Pass Up
Vectors with the address of the Nucleus exception handler (exceptionHandler) and the address of
the Nucleus stack page. Therefore, if the Pass Up Vector was correctly initialized, exceptionHandler
will be called (with a fresh stack) after each and every exception, exclusive of TLB-Refill events.
Furthermore, the processor state at the time of the exception (the saved exception state) will have been
stored (for Processor 0) at the start of the BIOS Data Page (0x0FFF.F000, constant BIOSDATAPAGE).
You can use the GET_EXCEPTION_STATE_PTR(id) macro to access the BIOS Data Page [Section 11] of
the various CPUs.
The cause of this exception is encoded in the cause register in the saved exception state.
Tip: To get the exception code you can use getCAUSE() [Section 13.2], the macro CAUSE_IS_INT,
and the constant CAUSE_EXCCODE_MASK.
• If CAUSE_IS_INT1 is true (the current exception is an interrupt), processing should be passed
along to your Nucleus’s device interrupt handler [Section 7];
• For exception codes 24-28 (TLB exceptions), processing should be passed along to your Nucleus’s
TLB exception handler [Section 8.3];
• For exception codes 8 and 11, processing should be passed along to your Nucleus’s SYSCALL
exception handler [Section 6];
• For other exception codes 0-7, 9, 10, 12-23 (Program Traps), processing should be passed along
to your Nucleus’s Program Trap exception handler [Section 8.2].
Hence, the entry point for the Nucleus’s exception handling is in essence a case statement that
performs a multi-way branch depending on the cause of the exception.
Important: To determine if the Current Process was executing in kernel-mode or user-mode, one
examines the Status register in the saved exception state. In particular, examine the MPP field with
saved_exception_state->status & MSTATUS_MPP_MASK (see section Dott. Rovelli’s thesis for more
details).
6 SYSCALL Exception Handling
A System Call exception occurs when the SYSCALL assembly instruction is executed. By convention,
the executing process places appropriate values in the general purpose registers a0-a3 immediately
prior to executing the SYSCALL instruction. The Nucleus will then perform some service on behalf
of the process executing the SYSCALL instruction depending on the value found in a0.
In particular, if the process making a SYSCALL request was in kernel-mode and a0 contained a
value in the negative range then the Nucleus should perform one of the services described below. See
/usr/include/uriscv/types.h on how access to registers a0-a3 from the saved exception state of
the current processor.
6.1 CreateProcess (NSYS1)
When requested, this service causes a new process, said to be a progeny of the caller, to be created.
a1 should contain a pointer to a processor state (state_t *). This processor state is to be used as
1The CAUSE_IS_INT macro checks if the most significant bit of the parameter is 1, if the most significant bit of the
cause register is 1 it means that the exception was caused by an interrupt.
5
the initial state for the newly created process. The process requesting the NSYS1 service continues
to exist and to execute. If the new process cannot be created due to lack of resources (e.g. no more
free PCBs), an error code of -1 is placed/returned in the caller’s a0, otherwise, return the process id
of the newly created process in the caller’s a0. Good design calls for tight/strong cohesion and loose
coupling between modules/classes/OS Levels, etc. Level 2 implements PCBs, and Level 3 utilizes
queues of PCBs to create a basic multiprogramming environment. However, it is the Support Level
that handles address translation as well as all exceptions beyond I/O interrupts and the first eight
system calls (and then, only if in kernel-mode). The design question then is how to provide Support
Level access to PCB fields that will only be used in the Support Level. The standard approach, at
least in systems-level programming such as an OS, is to define a structure containing the additional
Support Level fields (support_t) and then add a pointer (support_t *) to the PCB. The Support
Level code needing access to these fields will execute a NSYS8 [Section 6.8] which returns a pointer
to the Current Process’s support_t structure. This provides Support Level access to relevant PCB
fields while hiding the Level 3 (and Level 2) PCB fields. The NSYS1 service is requested by the calling
process by placing the value -1 in a0, a pointer to a processor state in a1, a process priority value in
a2, (optionally) a pointer to a Support Structure in a3, and then executing the SYSCALL instruction.
The following C code can be used to request a NSYS1:
int retValue = SYSCALL(CREATEPROCESS, state_t *statep, int prio, support_t *supportp);
Where the mnemonic constant CREATEPROCESS has the value of -1.
The newly populated PCB is placed on the Ready Queue and is made a child of the Current
Process. Process Count is incremented by one, and control is returned to the Current Process.
In summary, for NSYS1, one allocates a new PCB and initializes its fields:
• p_s from a1;
• p_supportStruct from a3. If no parameter is provided, this field is set to NULL.
• A new value must be generated and assigned to p_pid.
• The process queue fields (e.g. p_next) by the call to insertProcQ.
• The process tree fields (e.g. p_child) by the call to insertChild.
• Update process count.
• p_time is set to zero; the new process has yet to accumulate any CPU time.
• p_semAdd is set to NULL; this PCB/process is in the “ready” state, not the “blocked” state.
6.2 TerminateProcess (NSYS2)
This services causes the executing process or another process to cease to exist. In addition, recursively,
all progeny of that process are terminated as well. Execution of this instruction does not complete
until all progeny are terminated, after which the Scheduler should be called. The NSYS2 service is
requested by the calling process by placing the value -2 in a0 and then executing the SYSCALL
instruction.
The following C code can be used to request a NSYS2:
SYSCALL(TERMINATEPROCESS, int pid, 0, 0);
Where the mnemonic constant TERMINATEPROCESS has the value of -2.
This service terminates the calling process if PID is zero, the process whose identifier is PID
otherwise.
6
6.3 Passeren (P) (NSYS3)
This service requests the Nucleus to perform a P operation on a semaphore. The P or NSYS3 service is
requested by the calling process by placing the value -3 in a0, the physical address of the semaphore
to be P’ed in a1, and then executing the SYSCALL instruction. Depending on the value of the
semaphore, the value of the semaphore is decreased and control is returned to the Current Process,
or this process is blocked on the ASL (transitions from “running” to “blocked”) and the Scheduler is
called.
The following C code can be used to request a NSYS3:
SYSCALL(PASSEREN, int *semaddr, 0, 0);
Where the mnemonic constant PASSEREN has the value of -3.
6.4 Verhogen (V) (NSYS4)
This service requests the Nucleus to perform a V operation on a semaphore. The V or NSYS4 service
is requested by the calling process by placing the value -4 in a0, the physical address of the semaphore
to be V’ed in a1, and then executing the SYSCALL instruction. The V operation is non blocking,
depending on the value of the semaphore, control is either returned to the Current Process, or the
semaphore value is increased.
The following C code can be used to request a NSYS4:
SYSCALL(VERHOGEN, int *semaddr, 0, 0);
Where the mnemonic constant VERHOGEN has the value of -4.
6.5 DoIO (NSYS5)
PandOSsh supports only synchronous I/O; an I/O operation is initiated, and the initiating process is
blocked until the I/O completes. In order to begin an I/O operation a process should assign a value
to the Command field of the device register. NSYS5 assign a value to that command field for that
device [Section 12]. Hence, a NSYS5 is used to transition the Current Process from the “running”
state to a “blocked” state. More formally, this service performs a P operation on the semaphore that
the Nucleus maintains for the I/O device indicated by the value in a1. Since the semaphore that will
have a P operation performed on it is a synchronization semaphore, this call should always block the
Current Process on the ASL, after which the Scheduler is called. Terminal devices are two independent
sub-devices, and are handled by the NSYS5 service as two independent devices. Hence each terminal
device has two Nucleus maintained semaphores for it; one for character receipt and one for character
transmission. As discussed below [Section 7], the Nucleus will perform a V operation on the Nucleus
maintained semaphore whenever that (sub)device generates an interrupt. Once the process resumes
after the occurrence of the anticipated interrupt, the (sub)device’s status word is returned in a0. For
character transmission and receipt, the status word, in addition to containing a device completion
code, will also contain the character transmitted or received. The NSYS5 service is requested by the
calling process by placing the value -5 in a0, the address of the command field in a1 and the value to
be assigned in a2.
The following C code can be used to request a NSYS5:
int ioStatus = SYSCALL(DOIO, int *commandAddr, int commandValue, 0);
Where the mnemonic constant DOIO has the value of -5.
7
6.6 GetCPUTime (NSYS6)
This service requests that the accumulated processor time (in microseconds) used by the requesting
process be placed/returned in the caller’s a0. Hence, the Nucleus records (in the PCB: p_time) the
amount of processor time used by each process [Section 9]. The NSYS6 service is requested by the
calling process by placing the value -6 in a0 and then executing the SYSCALL instruction.
The following C code can be used to request a NSYS6:
cpu_t cpuTime = SYSCALL(GETCPUTIME, 0, 0, 0);
Where the mnemonic constant GETCPUTIME has the value of -6.
6.7 WaitForClock (NSYS7)
This service performs a P operation on the Nucleus maintained Pseudo-clock semaphore. This
semaphore is V’ed every 100 milliseconds by the Nucleus [Section 7.3]. Since the Pseudo-clock
semaphore is a synchronization semaphore, this call should always block the Current Process on the
ASL, after which the Scheduler is called. Hence, a NSYS7 is used to transition the Current Process
from the “running” state to a “blocked” state. The NSYS7 service is requested by the calling process
by placing the value -7 in a0 and then executing the SYSCALL instruction.
The following C code can be used to request a NSYS7:
SYSCALL(WAITCLOCK, 0, 0, 0);
Where the mnemonic constant WAITCLOCK has the value of -7.
6.8 GetSupportData (NSYS8)
This service requests a pointer to the Current Process’s Support Structure. Hence, this service returns
the value of p_supportStruct from the Current Process’s PCB. If no value for p_supportStruct was
provided for the Current Process when it was created, return NULL. The NSYS8 service is requested
by the calling process by placing the value -8 in a0 and then executing the SYSCALL instruction.
The following C code can be used to request a NSYS8:
support_t *sPtr = SYSCALL(GETSUPPORTPTR, 0, 0, 0);
Where the mnemonic constant GETSUPPORTPTR has the value of -8.
6.9 GetProcessID (NSYS9)
The NSYS9 service is requested by the calling process by placing the value -9 in a0 and then executing
the SYSCALL instruction. The following C code can be used to request a NSYS9:
int pid or ppid = SYSCALL(GETPID, int parent, 0, 0);
Where the mnemonic constant GETPID has the value of -9.
The process id (PID) of the calling process is placed/returned in the caller’s a0 if parent is zero.
The process id of the parent process (PID) of the calling process is placed/returned in the caller’s a0
otherwise. (It should return zero as the parent identifier of the root process)
8
6.10 Yield (NSYS10)
This service causes the calling process to relinquish the CPU. If there are other processes in the ready
queue, the yielded process is not immediately re-executed even if it has the highest priority. If is the
only ready process, it is executed. The NSYS10 service is requested by the calling process by placing
the value -10 in a0 and then executing the SYSCALL instruction. The following C code can be used
to request a NSYS10:
SYSCALL(YIELD, 0, 0, 0);
Where the mnemonic constant YIELD has the value of -10.
6.11 NSYS1-NSY10 in User-Mode
The SYSCALL identified by negative values are Nucleus services. These services are considered
privileged services and are only available to processes executing in kernel-mode. Any attempt to
request one of these services while in user-mode should trigger a Program Trap exception response.
Any attempt to request a non-existent Nucleus service should trigger a Program Trap exception too.
In particular the Nucleus should simulate a Program Trap exception when a privileged service
is requested in user-mode. This is done by setting the cause field in the stored exception state to
PRIVINSTR (Privileged Instruction), and calling one’s Program Trap exception handler.
6.12 Returning from a SYSCALL Exception
For SYSCALLs calls that do not block or terminate, control is returned to the Current Process at the
conclusion of the Nucleus’s SYSCALL exception handler. Observe that the correct processor state to
load (LDST) is the saved exception state and not the obsolete processor state stored in the Current
Process’s PCB. The saved exception state was the state of the process at the time the SYSCALL
was executed. The processor state in the Current Process’s PCB was the state of the process at the
start of it current time slice/quantum. Hence, any return value described above (e.g. NSYS6) needs
to be put in the specified register in the stored exception state. Furthermore, SYSCALLs that do
not result in process termination (eventually) return control to the process’s execution stream. This
is done either immediately (e.g. NSYS6) or after the process is blocked and eventually unblocked
(e.g. NSYS5). In any event the PC that was saved is, as it is for all exceptions, the address of the
instruction that caused that exception: the address of the SYSCALL assembly instruction. Without
intervention, returning control to the SYSCALL requesting process will result in an infinite loop of
SYSCALL’s. To avoid this the PC must be incremented by 4 (i.e. the μRISC-V wordsize) prior to
returning control to the interrupted execution stream.
6.13 Blocking SYSCALLs
For SYSCALLs that block (NSYS3, NSYS5, NSYS7 and NSYS10), a number of steps need to be
performed:
• As described above [Section 6.12] the value of the PC must be incremented by 4 to avoid an
infinite loop of SYSCALLs.
• The saved processor state must be copied into the Current Process’s PCB (p_s).
• Update the accumulated CPU time for the Current Process [Section 9].
• In case of NSYS5, write the command to the device register.
• Call the Scheduler.
9
7 Interrupt Exception Handling
A device or timer interrupt occurs when either a previously initiated I/O request completes or when
either a Processor Local Timer (PLT) or the Interval Timer makes a 0x0000.0000 ⇒ 0xFFFF.FFFF
transition.
Assuming that the (Processor 0) Pass Up Vector was properly initialized by the Nucleus as part
of Nucleus initialization [Section 2], and that the Nucleus exception handler (exceptionHandler)
correctly decodes that the current exception is an interrupt using CAUSE_IS_INT [Section 5], control
should be passed to one’s Nucleus interrupt exception handler. Depending on the interrupt exception
code we update a local variable IntlineNo according to the Table 1. The interrupt line 1 is for Process
Local Timer (PLT), the line 2 is for Pseudo-clock, and the other lines are for devices. For interrupt
lines 3–7 the Interrupting Devices Bit Map will indicate which devices on each of these interrupt lines
have a pending interrupt.
The Interrupting Devices Bit Map is a read-only five word area located starting from address
0x1000.0040. Interrupting Devices Bit Map words have this format: when bit i in word j is set to
one then device i attached to interrupt line j + 3 has a pending interrupt, see Table 2. An interrupt
pending bit is turned on automatically by the hardware whenever a device’s controller asserts the
interrupt line to which it is attached. The interrupt will remain pending –the pending interrupt bit
will remain on– until the interrupt is acknowledged. Interrupts for peripheral devices are acknowledged
by writing the acknowledge command code in the appropriate device’s device register.
Device Class Macro Name Interrupt Exception Code IntlineNo
Process Local Timer IL_CPUTIMER 7 1
Interval Timer IL_TIMER 3 2
Disk Devices IL_DISK 17 3
Flash Devices IL_FLASH 18 4
Network (Ethernet) Devices IL_ETHERNET 19 5
Printer Devices IL_PRINTER 20 6
Terminal Devices IL_TERMINAL 21 7
Table 1: Interrupt Line and Device Class Mapping
Word # Physical Address Field Name
4 0x1000.0040 + 0x10 Interrupt Line 7 Interrupting Devices Bit Map
3 0x1000.0040 + 0x0C Interrupt Line 6 Interrupting Devices Bit Map
2 0x1000.0040 + 0x08 Interrupt Line 5 Interrupting Devices Bit Map
1 0x1000.0040 + 0x04 Interrupt Line 4 Interrupting Devices Bit Map
0 0x1000.0040 Interrupt Line 3 Interrupting Devices Bit Map
Table 2: Interrupting Devices Bit Map Addresses
Tip: to figure out the current interrupt exception code, you can use a bitwise AND between
getCAUSE() and the constants CAUSE_EXCCODE_MASK.
Note, many devices per interrupt line may have an interrupt request pending, and that many
interrupt lines may simultaneously be on. Also, since each terminal device is two sub-devices, each
terminal device may have two interrupts pending simultaneously as well. One should process only one
interrupt at a time: the interrupt with the highest priority. The lower the interrupt line and device
number, the higher the priority of the interrupt. When there are multiple interrupts pending, and the
interrupt exception handler processes only the single highest priority pending interrupt, the interrupt
exception handler will be immediately re-entered as soon as interrupts are unmasked again; effectively
forming a loop until all the pending interrupts are processed.
Since terminal devices are actually two sub-devices, both sub-devices may have an interrupt pend-
ing simultaneously. For purposes of prioritizing pending interrupts, terminal transmission (i.e. writing
10
